1. Bauhardt, Christine. 2014. Solutions to the crisis? The Green New Deal, Degrowth, and the Solidarity Economy: Alternatives to the capitalist growth economy from an ecofeminist economics perspective. Ecological Economics 102: 60–68

Three green development strands in lit - Green New Deal, Degrowth, Solidarity Economy
None however adequately include gendered effects into their analysis
Capitalist order and patriarchy are intertwined and reproduce gender inequality



2. Brass, Jennifer N., Carley, Sanya, MacLean, Lauren M., Baldwin, Elizabeth. 2012. Power for Development:A Review of Distributed Generation Projects in the Developing World. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 37: 107–36

Electricity generation is becoming more decentralized, community scale and NGO funded systems more common
Focus has largely been in photovoltaics, but decent spread of others too. Issues with long term reliability if locals can't maintain systems
Local capabilities are key, as is the regulatory climate constraining decentralized production
*Nice concluding chart describing different aspects - pros in the short/long term, cons, the like



3. Bradley, Fiona and Rae, Callum. 2012. Energy autonomy in sustainable communities—A review of key issues. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16:6497–6506

Local scale renewable energy production is of great interest and importance as move from fossil fuels gets underway
*Lots of issues touched on briefly here, but above is really the main utility at the moment.



4. Bumpus, Adam G. and Liverman, Diana M. 2008. Accumulation by Decarbonization and the Governance of Carbon Offsets. Economic Geography 84:2, 127-155

Carbon offsets are being widely touted as a means of tacking carbon emissions, letting polluters purchase credits from carbon-rich
But this too often serves capital as an accumulation strategy accompanied by shifting of governance towards preferences of markets
In effect a product is created which is then subject to existing political-economic structures



5. Calvert, Kirby. 2016. From ‘energy geography’ to ‘energy geographies’: Perspectives on a fertile academic borderland. Progress in Human Geography 40:1, 105–125

There is more utility in pluralistic energy geographies than in a singular form, working in area requires multidisciplinary approach
Energy is fundamental to geographic relationships, but is not often explicitly considered
Energy transition and the energy landscape view are important focal points - must connect technical to human geographic approaches
ALternative energy futures need to be mapped using appropriate tools



6. Harrison, Conor & Popke, Jeff. 2011. “Because You Got to Have Heat”: The Networked Assemblage of Energy Poverty in Eastern North Carolina, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 101:4, 949-961

It is too often forgotten in discussions of energy transitions that energy poverty remains a crucial concern
It is also too often forgotten that social history preconditions contemporary experience - it isn't simple economics, even Marxist econ...
Energy poverty is connected to other poverty forms, ruralness, high energy bills are a continuous problem - weatherization can be a help



7. Coquil, Xavier, Béguin, Pascal, Dedieu, Benoît. 2013. Transition to self-sufficient mixed crop–dairy farming systems. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems: 29:3, 195–205

Self-sufficient farms are viable and important tools for promoting sustainability - reduced inputs is characteristic
Uptake is not automatic or without difficulty, but the process can itself help engage farmers with ideas, land, so on.



8. Glenna, Leland, Ader, David, Bauchspies, Wenda, Traoré, Abou, Aghoh-Noameshi, Rita Afiavi. 2012. The Efficacy of a Program Promoting Rice Self-Sufficiency in Ghana during a Period of Neoliberalism. Rural Sociology 77:4, 520-546

There is pushback at the international against pure neo-liberal policy for agriculture/food production. 
Cheap imports are known to undercut farmer livelihoods by eliminating their competitiveness in production
Self-sufficiency can sustain local farmers efforts and provide stability to their incomes, but markets still a key concern



9. Halberg, N., Dalgaard, R., Olesen, J.E., Dalgaard, T. 2008. Energy self-reliance, net-energy production and GHG emissions in Danish organic
cash crop farms. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems: 23:1, 30–37

Estimates of a typical Danish farm showed that 20% of land area for biodiesel cropping resulted in net energy exports
Also became self-sufficient in terms of nitrogen, eliminating need for pig slurry imports



10. Heaven, Sonia, Salter, Andrew M., Banks, Charles J. 2011. Integration of on-farm biodiesel production with anaerobic digestion
to maximise energy yield and greenhouse gas savings from process and farm residues. Bioresource Technology 102: 7784–7793

Production, transportation, conversion are the 3 primary phases of feedstock to biodiesel
This study also found that a farm could become a net energy exporter - 1733 MWh/yr electricity, 2662 tonnes year GHG reduction



12. Hornborg, Alf. 2014. Ecological economics, Marxism, and technological progress: Some explorations of the conceptual foundations of theories of ecologically unequal exchange. Ecological Economics 105, 11-18

Unequal exchange "conceptualized as an asymmetric net transfer of material inputs in production"
Tendency for this to happen between urban and rural, 3rd world and 1st world
*Will update later, this is EXCELLENT theory stuff



13. Kaygusuz, K. 2011. Energy services and energy poverty for sustainable rural development. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15: 936–947

*Lots here, but all pretty superficial and review-ey. Good, but not deep.
One key standou of the article is that rural dev can be boosted by renewables, but have to understand the economic system, ownership stuff




14. Liverman, Diana M. 2004. Who Governs, at What Scale and at What Price? Geography, Environmental Governance, and the Commodification of Nature. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 94:4, 734-738

*Exactly what it says on the tin - governance is not free from power and political-economy



15. Muller, Matthias Otto, Stampfli, Adrian, Dold, Ursula, Hammer, Thomas. 2011. Energy autarky: A conceptual framework for sustainable
regional development. Energy Policy 39

Energy is an essential need, but the current energy system is destroying the climate and the environment we rely on
Sustainable energy autarky - self-sufficiency within bordered area - at region level may be a viable sustainability effort
Transformation of a system towards this has the effect of mobilizing resources, boosts overall local vitality
3 Principles: "Use of endogenous potentials for renewable energy resources rather than energy imports. Decentralization of the energy system. Increases in the energy efficiency of the supply and the demand side"
Systems view essential as supply and demand are not auto-balanced in a decentralized system, other factors relevant
Cases in much of Europe offer lessons!



16. Nalepa, Rachel A. and Bauer, Dana Marie. 2012. Marginal lands: the role of remote sensing in constructing landscapes for
agrofuel development. The Journal of Peasant Studies 39:2, 403–422

Remote sensing is being heavily used to estimate biofuel capacity on marginal lands - but marginal is not a clear a concept as it seems
RS can't yet be done over a broad area at a fine enough scale that key dyamics are observed
Often what are called marginal lands are actually used in a specific important way by locals
There is a crucial difference between big enterprise ops and community scale ops
*MUch better piece than it looks from my notes



17. Ohimain, Elijah I., Izah, Sylvester C. 2014. Energy self-sufficiency of smallholder oil palm processing in Nigeria. Renewable Energy 63: 426-431

Palm oil wastes can be utilize to allow for local palm processers to be almost entirely energy self-sufficient - manual labor used



18. Pugesgaard, Siri, Olesen, Jørgen E., Jørgensen, Uffe, Dalgaard, Tommy. 2013. Biogas in organic agriculture—effects on productivity, energy self-sufficiency and greenhouse gas emissions. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 29:1, 28–41

A large 1000ha scale assessment concluded self-sufficiency in energy plus exports and nitrogen fertilizer plus reduced GHG possible, 20% land



19. Sovacool, Benjamin K. 2012. The political economy of energy poverty: A review of key challenges. Energy for Sustainable Development 16:272–282

Profit motive, bureaucratic intransigence, ulterior donor motives, social and technical barriers all cause energy poverty
Increases in energy access in developing world not necessarily getting to the right people/spreading evenly - inequality
Lack of access to modern/cleaner fuels has health impacts as well as increased labor time spent gathering fuel, can damage environment
Uptake is however not automatic, outreach and education is often necessary



20. Zimmerer, Karl. 2011. New Geographies of Energy: Introduction to the Special Issue. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 101:4, 705–711

Renewable energy landscapes important objects of study



21. Zhang, Sufang and Fu, Liwen. 2011. Exploring an integrated approach to utilize indigenous renewable energy to improve energy self-sufficiency and emission reduction. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15: 827–832

Rural populations in China are heavily reliant on straw waste to meet energy needs
"There exists a strong nexus between energy and sustainable
rural development, as energy is a basic input in almost all
economic development and social activities"




